
=head1 NAME

Net::ILO - Interface to HP Integrated Lights-Out

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    use Net::ILO;
 
    my $ilo = Net::ILO->new({
        address     => '192.168.128.10',
        username    => 'Administrator',
        password    => 'secret',
    });
    
    # returns 'on' or 'off'
    my $power_status = $ilo->power or die $ilo->error;
    
    $ilo->power('off');
    $ilo->power('reset');
    
    my $mac01  = $ilo->mac01;
    my $mac02  = $ilo->mac02;
    my $macilo = $ilo->macilo;
    
    # see METHODS for complete listing 
  
=head1 DESCRIPTION

The Net::ILO module is an interface to a subset of Hewlett-Packards 
Integrated Lights-Out out-of-band management system. HP's API is XML-based
and cumbersome to use; this module aims to simplify accessing 
the iLO from Perl while retaining as much functionality as possible.

Not every iLO function is implemented here, however most common ones are.

This module is based on the sixth edition of the "HP Integrated Lights-Out
Management Processor Scripting and Command Line Resource Guide" and has
been successfully tested with the following server types:

    DL360/G3
    DL360/G4
    DL360/G4p
    DL360/G5
    DL360/G6
    DL380/G3
    DL380/G4
    DL380/G5

It should work with other server models; feedback (either way) is much 
appreciated.

=head1 INTERFACE QUIRKS

Wherever possible, I have mimicked HP's API to maintain consistency. However,
certain names have been changed to reflect a more common usage, for example,
what HP calls 'DNS_NAME' is referred to as 'hostname' by Net::ILO.

Boolean types are represented in the documentation as either 'Yes' or 'No'.
When ILO returns a boolean response, it is shortened to 'Y' or 'N'. Either form
is acceptable when passing a value to your server's iLO.

Power and UID statuses are an exception; their states can be either
'on' or 'off'.

=head1 METHODS 

The interface is extensive and methods have been grouped by function for
easier digestion.

=head2 GENERAL METHODS

=over

=item new()
    
    my $ilo = Net::ILO->new({
        address     => '192.168.131.185',
        username    => 'Administrator',
        password    => 'secret',
    });
    
Creates a new ILO object, but does not attempt a connection. Parameters
are passed as an anonymous hashref.
    
Required paramters: 

None, however trying to call any method without setting at least the 
address, username and password will fail. You may however, set these 
later using their associated methods if you want.
   
Optional parameters:
 
 address - hostname or IP of remote machine's iLO
    port - default is 443, you may specify another port here
username - username for logging in to iLO
password - password for logging in to iLO

=item address()
    
    # connect to a different machine
    $ilo->address('192.168.131.186');

    print $ilo->power;

Returns or sets the address of the remote machine to connect to.

Please note that a lot of the data gathered (power state excluded) is cached.
Connecting to machine A, calling mac01(), then connecting to machine B and
calling mac01() will return the same data. It is recommended that you
instantiate a new object for each server you connect to. 

=item port()

    # your company's machines use a non-standard SSL port
    $ilo->port(447);
    
Returns or sets the port to connect to the remote server on.
Port 443 is assumed if not specified.

=item username()

    $ilo->username('jane_doe');

    # do some non-admin tasks
    # power-cycling machine requires elevated privileges

    $ilo->username('Administrator');
    $ilo->power('reset');    

Returns or sets the username to use when logging in.

=item password()

    # try both passwords, we forgot which one was good
    $ilo->password('foobar');

    # all methods return false on failure
    if (!$ilo->power) {

        $ilo->password('barfoo');

    }

Returns or sets the password to use when logging in.

=item error()

    $ilo->address('127.0.0.1');

    my $power_status = $ilo->power or die $ilo->error;

    Unable to establish SSL connection with 127.0.0.1:443 
    [IO::Socket::INET6 configuration failederror:00000000:lib(0):func(0):reason(0)] at /somescript.pl line 14.

Returns the last error reported, if any. All methods return false when
an error is encountered, and $ilo->error is set to the error message
reported by the remote machine. Note that on success, error() is not cleared,
and so should not be used to determine whether an error occurred.

Every single method which interacts with the remote machine may throw an
error, so it is very important that you check to ensure the command
succeeded. Error checking has been omitted from most examples for brevity.

=back

=head2 POWER MANAGEMENT

=over

=item power()

    my $power_status = $ilo->power or die $ilo->error;

    if ($power_status eq 'off') {

        $ilo->power('on');

    }
    else {

        $ilo->power('reset');

    }
    
Calling this method without parameters will return the current power
state of the machine, either 'on' or 'off'. Passing any of the following
to this method will attempt to change the power state:
    
    on
    off
    reset

=item power_consumption()

    # something like 340
    print $ilo->power_consumption;

Returns the current power consumption in watts.

This method is only available on G5 and newer models. Calling it on an
older machine will cause the following error to be returned:

Method not supported by this iLO version

=back

=head2 NETWORKING

=over

=item hostname

    # default is ILO0000000000 where 000... is your serial number
    my $machine_name = $ilo->hostname;

Returns the hostname of the remote machine. This is also the name shown
when logging in to the iLO interface, in the SSL cert, etc.

For information on changing the hostname, see the network() method.

=item domain_name()

    # maybe ilo.somecompany.net
    my $domain_name = $ilo->domain_name;
 
Returns the DNS domain name of the remote machine.

For information on changing the domain name, see the network() method.

=item dhcp_enabled()

    # either 'Y' or 'N'
    print $ilo->dhcp_enabled;
    
Returns 'Y' if DHCP is enabled for the iLO networking, and 'N' if a
static IP address is in use.

=item ip_address()

    # network dependent, something like 192.168.1.129
    print $ilo->ip_address;

Returns the IP address of the iLO processor. Note that the IP can NOT
be changed using this method. For managing network settings, see
network().

=item subnet_mask()

    # network dependent, something like 255.255.255.0
    print $ilo->subnet_mask;

Returns the subnet mask of the iLO processor.

=item gateway()

    # you guessed it, network dependent
    print $ilo->gateway;
    
Returns the default gateway in use for the iLO networking.

=item network()

    $ilo->network({
        name            => 'testbox01',
        domain_name     => 'mydomain.com',
        dhcp_enabled    => 'no',
        ip_address      => '192.168.128.10',
        subnet_mask     => '255.255.255.0',
        gateway         => '192.168.128.1',
    }) or die $ilo->error;
    
Allows you to modify the network configuration of the iLO processor. The
following parameters are allowed, see individual methods above for more detail:

    name
    domain_name
    dhcp_enabled
    ip_address
    subnet_mask
    gateway

If any parameter is not specified, current values are used.

Setting dhcp_enabled to 'yes' causes all IP related settings to have no effect.

If the IP address is changed here, address() is updated with the new information.

Networking changes cause the iLO processor to reset, it should become
available again within 30 seconds. 
   
The rationale behind seperate methods for viewing and changing network
settings is as follows:

Network configuration generally needs to be modified as a package, for
example, changing both the IP address and default gateway. Without a
separate method, calling the ip_address() method as a setter could
cause you to lose connectivity.

=back

=head2 SYSTEM INFORMATION

=over

=item model()

    # ProLiant DL380 G5
    print $ilo->model;

Returns the model name of the machine.

=item serialID()

    # unique to your machine
    print $ilo->serialID;

Returns the serial number of the remote machine.

=item cpus()

    my $cpus = $ilo->cpus;

    print "Number of CPUs: ", scalar @$cpus, "\n\n";

    foreach my $cpu (@$cpus) {

        print "  CPU: ", $cpu->{name}, "\n";
        print "Speed: ", $cpu->{speed}, "\n";
        print "Cores: ", $cpu->{cores}, "\n";

    }
    
    # yields the following on a single CPU Xeon:
    #
    # Number of CPUs: 1
    #
    #   CPU: Proc 1
    # Speed: 2000 MHz
    # Cores: 4 of 4 cores; 4 threads

Returns arrayref containing information about each CPU. Included is the
CPU name (eg. Proc 1, Proc 2, etc.), speed in MHz and number of cores.

=item ramslots()

    my $ramslots = $ilo->ramslots or die $ilo->error;

    print "DIMM slots: ", scalar @$ramslots, "\n\n";

    foreach my $slot (@$ramslots) {

        print " Slot: ", $slot->{location}, "\n";
        print " Size: ", $slot->{size},     "\n";
        print "Speed: ", $slot->{speed},    "\n" if defined $slot->{speed};

    }

    # yields the following on a DL360/G5 with 8 GB of RAM:
    #
    # DIMM slots: 8
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 1A
    # Size: 2048 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 2C
    # Size: 1024 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 3A
    # Size: 2048 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 4C
    # Size: 1024 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 5B
    # Size: 1024 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 6D
    # Size: not installed
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 7B
    # Size: 1024 MB
    # Speed: 667 MHz
    #
    # Slot: DIMM 8D
    # Size: not installed

Returns arrayref containing information about installed memory modules. Includes
slot name, module size and module speed. Speed is undefined when slot is empty.

=item mac01()

    my $eth0_mac = $ilo->mac01;

Returns the mac address associated with the machine's primary NIC (aka eth0).

This method is not supported by pre-generation 4 hardware.

=item mac02()

    my $eth1_mac = $ilo->mac02;

Returns the mac address associated with the machine's secondary NIC (aka eth1).
    
This method is not supported by pre-generation 4 hardware.

=item macilo()

    my $ilo_mac = $ilo->macilo;

Returns the mac address associated with the machine's iLO interface.
    
This method is not supported by pre-generation 4 hardware.

=item biosdate()

    # format is 11/30/2006
    print $ilo->biosdate;

Returns the release date of the system's BIOS.

=back

=head2 SERVER HEALTH

=over

=item fans()

    my $fans = $ilo->fans;

    foreach my $fan (@$fans) {

        print "    Name: ", $fan->{name},     "\n";
        print "Location: ", $fan->{location}, "\n";
        print "   Speed: ", $fan->{speed},    "\n";
        print "    Unit: ", $fan->{unit},     "\n";
        print "  Status: ", $fan->{status},   "\n\n";

    }

    #     Name: Fan Block 1
    # Location: Power Supply
    #    Speed: 34
    #     Unit: Percentage
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Fan Block 2
    # Location: CPU 2
    #    Speed: 29
    #     Unit: Percentage
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Fan Block 3
    # Location: CPU 1
    #    Speed: 34
    #     Unit: Percentage
    #   Status: Ok

Returns arrayref containing the status of the fan block(s) installed in the 
system. 'status' will be 'Ok' or 'Failed'. 

=item temperatures()

    my $temperatures = $ilo->temperatures;

    foreach my $sensor (@$temperatures) {

        print "    Name: ", $sensor->{name},     "\n";
        print "Location: ", $sensor->{location}, "\n";
        print "   Value: ", $sensor->{value},    "\n";
        print "    Unit: ", $sensor->{unit},     "\n";
        print "  Status: ", $sensor->{status},   "\n\n";

    }

    #     Name: Temp 1
    # Location: I/O Board
    #    Value: 49
    #     Unit: Celsius
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Temp 2
    # Location: Ambient
    #    Value: 19
    #     Unit: Celsius
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Temp 3
    # Location: CPU 1
    #    Value: 32
    #     Unit: Celsius
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Temp 4
    # Location: CPU 1
    #    Value: 32
    #     Unit: Celsius
    #   Status: Ok
    #
    #     Name: Temp 5
    # Location: Power Supply
    #    Value: 28
    #     Unit: Celsius
    #   Status: Ok

Returns arrayref containing the status of the temperature sensor(s) installed
in the system. 'status' will be 'Failed' if the temperature exceeds the
critical threshold.

=item power_supplies()

    my $power_supplies = $ilo->power_supplies;

    foreach my $power_supply (@$power_supplies) {

        print "  Name: ", $power_supply->{name},   "\n";
        print "Status: ", $power_supply->{status}, "\n\n";

    }

    #   Name: Power Supply 1
    # Status: Ok

Returns arrayref containing the status of the power supplies installed in the
system. 'status' will be 'Ok' or 'Failed'. 

=back

=head2 ILO INFORMATION AND MANAGEMENT

=over

=item reset()

    # iLO web interface is hung, try resetting it
    $ilo->reset;

Resets the iLO management processor. 

=item fw_type()

    # either 'iLO' or 'iLO2'
    print $ilo->fw_type;

Returns the type of iLO management processor in the remote machine.
As far as I know, possible values are 'iLO' and 'iLO2', depending on
how modern the server is.

=item fw_version()

    # something like 1.26
    print $ilo->fw_version;

Returns the version of iLO firmware currently running.

=item fw_date()

    # format is Nov 17 2006
    print $ilo->fw_date;
    
Returns the date the iLO firmware was released.

=item ssh_status()

    # either 'Y' or 'N'
    print $ilo->ssh_status;

    # disable SSH access to iLO
    $ilo->ssh_status('No');

Returns or modifies whether SSH access is enabled on the iLO.
Gives 'Y' if SSH is enabled and 'N' if SSH is disabled.

=item ssh_port()

    if ($ilo->ssh_port == 22) {

        $ilo->ssh_port(12345);

    }

Returns or sets the port iLO will listen on for incoming SSH connections.
This should be an integer between 0 and 65535.

Changing the SSH port causes the iLO processor to reset, it should become
available again within about 30 seconds.

=item http_port()

    # default is 80
    print $ilo->http_port;

    $ilo->http_port(8000);

Returns or sets the port iLO's http service listens on. Valid port numbers
are between 0 and 65535.

Changing the HTTP port causes the iLO processor to reset, it should become
available again within about 30 seconds.

=item https_port()
   
    # default is 443 
    print $ilo->https_port;

    $ilo->https_port(554);

Returns or sets the port iLO's https service listens on. Valid port numbers
are between 0 and 65535.

Changing the HTTPS port causes the iLO processor to reset, it should become
available again within about 30 seconds.

=item session_timeout()

    # default is 30
    print $ilo->session_timeout;

Returns the current session timeout in minutes. This applies to all sessions,
eg. http, https, ssh, etc.

=back

=head2 USER MANAGEMENT

=over

=item add_user()

    # add a user with admin privileges
    $ilo->add_user({
        name     => 'John Doe',
        username => 'jdoe',
        password => 'secret',
        admin    => 'Yes',
    });

    # add a regular user
    $ilo->add_user({
        name      => 'Jim Beam',
        username  => 'jbeam',
        password  => 'secret',
    });

Adds a user who will be able to log in to iLO via HTTPS, SSH, and any
other interface. When adding a non-admin user, passing in the parameter
admin => 'No' is also acceptable. 

=item mod_user()

    # change current user's password
    # in this case username is optional

    $ilo->mod_user({
        password => 'supersecret',
    });

    # change another user's password
    # this requires administrator privileges

    $ilo->mod_user({
        username => 'guest',
        password => 'changem3!',
    });
    
Method for modifying existing user accounts. Currently this method is
only able to change user's passwords; it cannot change permission
levels.

Passwords may consist of up to 39 printable characters. If you exceed
the maximum password length, an error to that effect will be returned.

If you update the current user's password the stored password used for
logging in will be updated automatically.

=item del_user()

    # you're fired!
    $ilo->del_user('jbeam');

Removes an existing user from the iLO.

=back

=head2 MISCELLANEOUS

=over

=item uid()

    if ($ilo->uid eq 'on') {

        $ilo->uid('off');

    }

Get the status of or control the machine's UID light.

Called without parameters simply returns the current status, either
'on' or 'off'.

You may pass values 'on' or 'off' to this method however be careful not to
set the uid light to on when it is currently on, and vice versa, as this
could throw an error, depending on iLO firmware version.

An error will be returned if you pass an invalid state.

    $ilo->uid('blinking') or die $ilo->error;

    State blinking is not valid at /somescript.pl line 13.

=back

=head1 DIAGNOSTICS

=over

=item C<User login name was not found>

General authentication error, eg. bad username or password when logging in.

Could also mean you attempted to change the settings (eg. password) for a 
user which doesn't exist

=item C<Method not supported by this iLO version>

Either your machine / iLO firmware version is too old, or the method you called
requires a more advanced license than you have.

=item C<State %s is not valid>

An invalid UID state was passed to uid(). Valid states are 'on' and 'off'.

=item C<Unable to establish SSL connection with %s:%d [%s]>

An error occurred while connecting to iLO. The message in brackets is
propagated from IO::Socket::SSL, and is rarely useful.

=item C<Error transmitting command to server>

A connection was established, but something went wrong while sending the
command to the remote iLO. Try reconnecting, and ensure that your
network settings are correct.

=item C<No response received from remote machine>

A connection was established and a command successfully sent to the iLO, but
no data was received. Again, ensure that your network settings are correct.

There could also be something wrong with the remote iLO management processor.
Troubleshooting is beyond the scope of this document.

=item C<Error parsing response: %s>

An error occurred while parsing the XML response from the iLO. The error
message is propagated from XML::Simple, and could mean HP changed the iLO
API.

=back

=head1 DEPENDENCIES

    IO::Socket::SSL
    XML::Simple

=head1 AUTHOR

Nicholas Lewis, C<< <nick.lewis at gmail.com> >>

=head1 BUGS

Please report any bugs or feature requests to C<bug-net-ilo at rt.cpan.org>, or through
the web interface at L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/ReportBug.html?Queue=Net-ILO>.  I will be notified, and then you'll
automatically be notified of progress on your bug as I make changes.


=head1 SUPPORT

You can find documentation for this module with the perldoc command.

    perldoc Net::ILO


You can also look for information at:

=over 4

=item * RT: CPAN's request tracker

L<http://rt.cpan.org/NoAuth/Bugs.html?Dist=Net-ILO>

=item * AnnoCPAN: Annotated CPAN documentation

L<http://annocpan.org/dist/Net-ILO>

=item * CPAN Ratings

L<http://cpanratings.perl.org/d/Net-ILO>

=item * Search CPAN

L<http://search.cpan.org/dist/Net-ILO>

=back


=head1 COPYRIGHT & LICENSE

Copyright 2010 Nicholas Lewis, all rights reserved.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.


=cut

